muslims in norway are now establishing a
masjid and dawa center to enhance the
norwegian dawah if you donate to this
cause you will ensure allah reap the
rewards of thousands of muslims coming
back to islam and many of those who
become dwight and invite to islam so
click the link and donate now and share
the video for extra reward
assalamu alaikum
welcome to another episode of the mh
podcast the most irregular podcast
on the internet today and i'm joined
with none other
uh than the infamous the legendary for
us zahabi or the habi you would say
properly in the arabic languages man
just for those who don't know just a
quick introduction probably one of the
most notorious
and celebrated mma coaches in the world
today
has coached john st pierre who's
noted as seen as the pound-for-pound
best fighter in the world rory mcdonald
and other fighters
as well um he's um the head coach at
tristar gym a gym which is seen as one
of the best gyms
for mma from his martial arts in the
entire world at least in the top five or
top 10 at least
been ranked like that and um and also a
philosopher in his own right and someone
who's uh
has uh has contributed quite strongly i
think in the in the public discourse on
the youtube scene in the last two to
three years for us how are you doing
thank you for having me oh it's a
pleasure to actually be able to see you
in the flesh
you know finally you know you're in here
my flesh
you know
there's a lot to talk to you about um
and i'm just thinking where to start
um and what we usually talk about we
usually talk about feel philosophical
issues and i'm sure we will i mean we
are going to talk about that today as
well um
but what i wanted to start by talking to
you about really was something quite imp
important for the muslim community and
for many computers communities are going
to be watching this relating to health
and fitness we've had these kind of
conversations when we're having lunch as
well
but i think some of the gems that you
were kind of putting forward to us need
to be
said to the public
now
a lot of us nowadays we we have so many
diet plans to choose from
we've got the carnivorous diet we have
the ketogenic diet we have uh vegan
vegan diet uh you know we have calorie
deficit we have you know fat fat deficit
so many deficits so many different diets
uh it's intermittent fasting has become
really big there's so many different
youtubers now that are on the scene that
given their own diet plans
this is becoming so confusing now mm-hmm
honestly it's i'm speaking from
experience when you it's almost as if
now there's competing schools of thought
you have the keto school of thought
where everything keto is good you know
and you have people that you know the
solution
to everything is ketogenic diet and
intermittent fasting and then you have
other people that say no actually no
this is nonsense let's go the opposite
way
or the carnivorous diet which is quite
close to quito
what do we do
i would say i love uh there's a paul
check quote that i absolutely love he
says look we're as different on the
inside as we are on the outside it's
such an important quote because it's
true look at the differences we have on
the outside you're not everybody's gonna
react the same way to the same diet
so there's some exploration now i i
personally think that
you should
try to choose a diet that you can live
with for the rest of your life
so if me personally i can't do keto i
can do keto for a little while then i
get bored of it i want to eat
carbohydrates i have i'm drawn to
carbohydrates i love carbohydrates
so my diet is is mostly high carb low
fat
really yeah i'm more high carb low fat i
perform better i've experimented with
different diets i'm more comfortable
with why does protein fit into that five
cell um i have i have proteins but if i
want to lean up i go more towards egg
whites egg whites are high protein low
fat so i want a low fat source chicken
breast a low fat source of
uh
flesh foods proteins so as a percentage
let's just kind of give this a visual if
a hundred percent is you've got carbs i
mean this is simplistic but you've got
carbs proteins and protein uh
fats and proteins right
what kind of percentage are we looking
at here i would say 70 percent is carbs
i eat a lot but i train a lot if you
train less you don't need that many
carbs now these keto guys i think this
guy's uh you're crazy these guys
you guys
don't forget i'm in a glycogenic sport
that means i need i primarily use
carbohydrates
for fuel right okay so it's normal if
i'm gonna wake up in the morning and go
wrestle and i'm gonna go at night
wrestle again you need a lot of
carbohydrates yes you don't need so much
carbohydrates if you're just working
behind the desk i would tell you get
your carbs from greens eat more greens
when i say carbs i mean starches and
keto ketones are not a substitute for
carbohydrates you're saying no not at
all because ketones
see if your body wants to metabolize fat
for energy it takes longer there's a
longer process
so if you're wrestling and you want to
grab a guy and lift them up in the air
you need the energy now you need
glycogen in your muscle the glycogen in
your muscle gets transformed to energy
immediately when the muscle contracts it
uses that that
that energy that's stored in the muscle
itself
if you're running a marathon if you're
doing aerobic work
it's lower intensity then your body can
use fats very successfully so you have
aerobic champions in aerobic sports that
only uh work on fats but there are no
sprinters 100-meter sprinters
high-intensity athletes that work only
on fats it doesn't exist
so what sport are you in this is very
important yeah you'll never see a guy
who's high fat low carb doesn't carb up
the day of the 100 meter race now
sometimes they do it
it's a bit complicated sometimes they go
on a short phase of ketogenic like mma
fighters will go on a ketogenic diet low
carb diet just to drop the water
because
the way your body stores carbs is one
part carbohydrate or one part glycogen
actually i should say
three parts water so you have a lot of
water
when you eat carbs you retain more water
so we temporarily take away their carbs
let them shed that water
they lose weight after the weigh-in we
carved them up okay so to keep this
really simple look what kind of sport
are you in if you're in a sport that's
high-intensity eat carbs now i think
everybody should like i think the vast
majority of people will do well on what
they call a book called the starch
solution
you eat
it's a it's basically i'm not vegan okay
but i'm i'm
i don't believe we need so much animal
products okay there's a animal products
are really pushed on us because
i think it's it's big business right i
do believe in eating meat i think you
can have a deficiency on vegan diet long
term you can have problems what do you
think of just on this point what do you
think of the arguments that are being
put by many who kind of have a vegan
diet um the chi i think the china study
whatever of the meat and they say it's
um it brings you know there's a
correlation between cancer for example
um
to what extent do you kind of look at is
it meat or excessive amounts of meat
that's why i differentiate okay i think
eating meat three times a day is crazy i
think it's insane you might as well be a
smoker right okay you don't need that
much meat okay now i like to eat meat
when we're sitting around in a social
gathering okay somebody cooked meat
let's eat it and that includes fish by
the way
every type of animal product right even
if it's even
eggs and cheese every single animal
product mass-produced product in in one
way or another they they've
i hate to use the word poisoned it but
they they've done some bad things to it
yes you can get away
around it because
if you want to mass produce it they have
to mess with it
that's almost true of all our foods but
grains rice oatmeal pastas
if you have if you if you take in low
fat high carb you won't get fat just
like you won't get fat if you do high
fat low carb you could do it the other
way around
i prefer
high carb low fat because i'm in a
glycogen export i need that glycogen and
i feel full and satisfied one book i
really recommend is the starch
starch solution by john mcdougall
i think it's a fantastic book i think
people should try it
because you'll feel
very very good however i do believe he
goes too far i'm more of a nutritarian
like a joel furman where he gives you a
little more allowance of fat and meat
i think you should have meat once a day
if you're very active even once a week
from once a day to once but once a day
is too much even i think way too much
and if you eat meat should be like a
deck of cards not more
we eat too much animal products now look
my favorite thing to eat and for me is
steak so sometimes i make myself a nice
juicy steak i treat myself once in a
while
but you got to start equating steak with
like smoking would you do it every day
no i would do three times a day no like
be careful with eating meat it's not
healthy long term now a great example of
this is the okinawans the okinawans are
mainly vegan they eat sweet potato rice
vegetable and they eat fresh foods once
a month
so
how do we know all this well we observe
different uh different uh cultures how
they ate
like for instance the the inuits they
only eat fish
the age the the past in the united
states of the past today they have more
modern foods okay but
back in the day they used to eat mostly
fish you know they live in the arctic
yeah there's no uh grains there's no
vegetables good point here they never
die of heart disease because they're
eating fish but they die of cancer
so we know that too much eating
flesh foods can lead to cancer again
there's always more elements there's
always more to the story it's always
more complicated however there is a
there is a correlation between eating
fresh foods
and cancer
so and and many other ailments so i
would tell you that personally from my
researches and studying this for so many
years i would tell you that
i'm not vegan because i think also
veganism will lead to problems yeah
vitamin deficiency problems yeah calcium
deficiency
loss of muscle okay they try to say no
you don't need it i don't i've i believe
you lose muscle i would love to debate
somebody who who says it different
because you can get your proteins on a
plant diet but it's hard it's difficult
most people won't do it right it's
complicated that's my point it's complex
vegan diet you have to you have to be
you have to know so much about
everything it's very complicated so i
don't recommend it but i recommend
because you see when the animal eats
certain nutrients and you eat that
animal you get those nutrients
make it simple just eat a serving of
meat two to three times a week and again
it can vary some people will do better
on one portion of meat a week some
people do better on one portion of meat
per month you have to experiment
so me when i feel my best is when i have
meat let's say three times a week and
i'm talking about small portions of meat
that's when i'm feeling my best i feel
the most energy i feel the most active i
feel the most lean i feel the most
vibrant
so
there's a lot to say with cutting out
animal products but people are so
conditioned that if they don't eat
animal products something bad is going
to happen it's not true it's actually
the opposite when you lower your animal
products
your cardio will go up your well-being
will go up your energy will go up
everything will go up you don't need so
much flesh food
and so so okay you've kind of alluded to
the fact that going vegan sometimes is i
mean maybe i'm reading this wrong but
being being vegan sometimes is a good
thing
but you've also said that we need meat
so how would you play it so you got 52
weeks in a year
you got 365 days do you do it in such a
way that okay like your one week on one
week off or how do you how would you
play it i would i would recommend people
try eating meat if you eat meat every
day yeah try to even eat three three
portions a week now lower it then go to
once a week
slowly work your way don't do anything
drastic
does that apply with like animal
products as well actually everything
that comes from jesus jesus everything
the
the farming industry has completely
polluted our food
everything has been touched
unless you're ready to spend a million
dollars on your food a year you can't
eat untainted foods it's very difficult
okay like i'm a million dollars in
exaggeration i'm just trying to
spend a lot of money trying to get
organic never been touched by anybody
food it's tough
um i really recommend people experiment
with lowering the amount of fresh foods
they eat we've been we've been
brainwashed we've been marketed to
to eat milk cheese uh flesh foods this
is very important this is number one
it's not true it's not true so you're
saying go down so you're down if you're
eating it three times a day go once
oh yeah if you're eating me three times
a day you're killing yourself like i
don't see how you could function like i
i couldn't picture myself eating meat
three times a day i used to what should
i like then in the morning i eat
generally oatmeal okay i think oatmeal
is the ultimate breakfast because it
makes you feel satiated for longer about
eggs and stuff no eggs no if i eat eggs
for pleasure if i'm sitting down it's a
saturday morning and i'm eating with my
family we'll make eggs it's a i love
eggs i can eat eggs every day if you
give me but because of the consequence
of eating eggs every day i do not eat
eggs every day okay but in terms of
enjoyment i don't know there's nothing
more i love than toasting eggs in the
morning
i'll have eggs once in a while but
having eggs every day is bad for you in
my opinion it's not good
all right so that's breakfast so what's
lunch like for you
lunch i'll have rice potato salad
and a little bit of meat maybe
if i'm training really hard
chicken okay a lean chicken you got to
try to keep it lean and a small portion
like we're talking about a deck of cards
what about dinner
dinner i'll probably do something like
uh it'll be very similar to lunch it'll
be a
pasta or or
rice or
a sweet potato with a little ketchup
maybe a few fruit you know i try to keep
fruit low as well and i do a lot of
lentils sometimes i'll make hummus with
bread hummus and bread it's vegan it's
good if you have that right so that's it
that's enough and sometimes i don't even
eat dinner when i want to lose weight i
don't even eat dinner i'll eat from ten
to six
so for me i go to practice after six so
after training there's no there's no
meal after i drink water and go to bed
that's it
and so do you have only three meals a
day
um
i eat about three meals a day with with
a few snacks but in a window small
window and i think people have to learn
to skip meals okay tell us about
intermittent fasting because this is a
big thing for you isn't it intermittent
fasting is huge if you want to keep your
youth yeah intermittent fasting is
massive what is it first of all for
those of you intermittent fasting is
it's hard to define because you could
say look i fast it for 12 hours is that
intimate fasting yes but a very a very
beginner level so i always tell people
look try to eat from nine to nine
then from nine am to eight
from nine to seven and slowly because it
gets easier
then all of a sudden you're eating from
nine to six and you're full after six
you don't want to eat anymore what are
the benefits of that when you don't eat
for at least 16 hours
about 16 hours now this is a
guesstimation okay it's not exactly the
16 hours for everybody depending on how
how how much you exercise how much you
ate the day before et cetera but
approximately 16 hours we know that a
phenomenon now we that they call
autophagy the nobel prize was given for
this discovery in 2016. so it's a
scientific fact autophagy is a greek
word for
uh self-digestion your body when it
after 16 hours of eating starts to eat
itself without eating sources after 16
hours of no food no intake
your body starts to consume its own
cells
the cells that it'll consume first
are the more uh
the poorest cells the weakest cells the
the the poorly replicated cells i should
say
and those are the cells that are toxic
cancerous etc i'm relying on the work of
jason fong okay i'm not a biologist here
but jason's fund's work uh the
all you need to know about fasting he
goes into it he has a great book called
has a few books on fasting and uh he
talks about how his claim not mine that
even fasting combats cancer
and for this reason for autophagy again
if you want to get into the specifics
you have to rely on his work he's a
doctor out of toronto he's the one who
helped georgetown pierre uh
combat uh
his uh colitis without drugs without
using drugs just using fasting
and he did it successfully
and uh many of us started fasting after
that as well and we saw a huge benefit
that of course we fast because we're
muslim since we're young
but
doing fasting throughout the year also
has major benefits and i feel that um
it's something that's
very very beneficial even for your
hormones
however i think again it should be
gradual and there's two you can go too
far you can fast for too long and make
yourself weak and frail we don't want to
fast for too long
16 hours of fasting seems to be really
good
and
some you can experiment with 18
sometimes i even do one meal a day
like today i i we ate a meal together
that's my only meal for the day and last
time i ate was yesterday morning wow so
that's it for today why because today
i'm not training i'm not exercising i'm
doing very little i have a wake-up call
if you're training then you do what two
i would i wouldn't have eaten such a
large meal and i would have i would have
ate throughout the day i see so it could
be digested when i get to practice
so look i really believe i really like
this app called the fast tick
f-a-s-t-i-c because it kind of gives you
the road map of what your body's doing
so you start fasting you click the
button it tells you what phase you're in
you don't get commissioned for saying no
no
no it's it's a great app because it kind
of like
it explains to you why you're feeling
this way oh my god i'm feeling like this
yeah don't worry wait a little bit
longer your blood sugar levels are going
to stabilize and it does and it's just a
great way to train yourself to know the
different phases of fasting and fasting
the great thing about fasting can be
quite addictive
because if you fast long often enough
you start actually to get a
cognitively uh charged
start being really alert really yeah
yeah plato wouldn't uh
uh except students that were in a fasted
state
because you become cognitively charged
oh yeah absolutely yeah yeah you can be
if you fast long enough intensely enough
over a time
you will have this cognitive charge it's
hard to explain but it's just a mental
alertness it's kind of like drinking
five espressos you know it's an
enjoyable feeling because
when you when you eat all the time the
blood flow goes towards the stomach it
drains blood from the brain it does make
there's a chain reaction but after a
while of not eating you're totally
totally digested
you've given your system a break
your system seems to one way or another
have more energy for some people say
it's the ketones because your body
starts burning ketones and ketones it's
almost like hey your body's starving
give him the good fuel let him find
resources right now you know make him
super alert make him super cognitive
because he
again this is a narrative i'm just
giving you a nerve
give him the really good stuff the
ketones so that he goes out in nature
and finds some resources
you know make him super alert uh you get
this level of a heightened awareness
that comes with prolonged
fasting and so
what breaks your fast because
people might be thinking about dry fats
right now that's the kind of only
experience they may have had the ramadan
fast for example
so you're not talking about that you're
what you can still drink water right
yeah especially because we're training
throughout the day we need water that's
number one yeah two percent dehydration
equals six percent loss in performance
say that again two percent dehydration
really
equates to six percent loss in
performance now this is uh this study
was done on soldiers running through
gauntlets they have to run shoot et
cetera
and they can only ethically dehydrate
them two percent not more so all we have
is two percent studies on two percent
dehydration imagine there may be a law
of diminishing returns right could be
yeah
but ethically they say they can only go
two percent so what happens
they got six percent and they say even
the top of the top
soldiers had a diminished
ability by six percent yeah so it
doesn't matter how tough you are you
need hydration hydration is more
important even than food you said you
could also have black coffee right black
coffee tea
and uh water
what's that no no no no milk milk will
will spike your insulin so you have a
java insulin response which you don't
want during your fast
okay now this is in relation to
diet i think you've kind of covered a
lot of bases there and that maybe many
people will be changing their lives for
the better and that's what we're really
hoping for because
last time we had this conversation you
you spoke you gave a very
very succinct piece of advice and i
actually went viral i'm not sure if you
know
it got like 400 500 000 views or
something like that just how to lose
weight and
people really really enjoyed it and
that's why i think i started
with that this time um i want to talk a
bit about
before we get to self-defense obviously
which is your area of specialism
to
training more generally for people that
may not necessarily be into self-defense
or
may have kind of weakened because of the
years the wear and tear of whatever
they want to get into a gym program just
a normal gym program what would you
recommend for a beginner
i think the number one workout for just
general fitness is a
bag workout a punching bag workout
really it's the ultimate i'll tell you
why
number one you're learning a skill
you're learning how to throw a good
punch
if you get up every day and you hit the
back for a few minutes before you go to
work compare that to somebody who's
running on a treadmill
the guy hitting the bag is going to have
less injury
the guy running
is going to have more injury yeah the
guy hitting the bag is going to have
less inflammation that guy running is
going to have more inflammation the guy
hitting the back is gonna have higher
testosterone the guy running is gonna
have lower testosterone like you beat
him every which way plus if we ever get
into an altercation he's gonna run i'm
not
you know what i mean like you could
throw a good punch you could defend
yourself you're also cultivating a skill
so what i tell people is the thing is
like when you run
you can get overuse injuries especially
if your technique is poor and most
people's running technique is poor
unknowingly
their mechanics have been changed
because they're wearing shoes
if you look at barefoot runners versus
people who learn to run in shoes their
mechanics are different
the best mechanics are those who learn
how to run barefoot third world
countries they're the best at the
kenyans etc
so because we have poor running
mechanics if you run for a prolonged
period of time your knee starts hurting
you your hip starts hurting you i have
one of my students he's an orthopedic
surgeon and i asked him which sport has
the most injuries he said runners
runners it's incredible like they
injured themselves by prolonged running
over years
so when you work the heavy bag but you
need to do it with instruction like for
example you're saying that you learn a
new skill but if the person just doing
on their own volition with their own
devices right yeah they could be kind of
reinforcing bad habits right yeah true
but what's so good about our day and age
is that you can easily get a digital
coach
go on youtube there's a thousand one
tutorials how to jab how to throw right
it's good that because if someone is if
if someone does that say and the person
is not overseeing what they're doing and
then correcting them then is there still
the issue of reinforcement of background
i think over years look if you're
looking to be a world-class boxer then
yeah you need a coach yeah yeah but if
you're just a layman you know if you're
a regular joe learning just getting in
shape i think it's more than enough a
digital tutorial is plenty but what i
see a lot of is a lot of people that go
into personal training and get personal
trainers and they do like pad work and
stuff and the personal trainer is not a
trained martial artist so he will teach
the client
a technique which is not a correct one
could that be more harmful than good i
think there are levels of instructors
some can do more harm than good but the
vast majority boxing is a known art like
if you go around the world they have
boxing yeah yeah and there are different
levels of boxing instruction but it's
fairly good yes so i would say you know
find yourself a a a reputable instructor
online are you saying boxing are you
saying kickboxing
both i would start with boxing graduate
to kickboxing go to muay thai
because the thing is with punching bag
you can you can you don't even have to
hit the bag hard let's say your
shoulders are sore just kind of you can
even shadow box zero impact very good
cardio yep and i like to mix bag work
with calisthenics right so i like to do
one minute hitting the bag one minute
swinging a kettlebell so i put on mma
gloves so i can swing the kettlebell one
minute hitting the back one minute
getting ball i do that for maybe six
minutes take a break
repeat it one more time
and then like even kettlebell might be a
little bit for some okay do push ups and
squats one minute exercise one minute
hitting the back one minute exercise one
it's a phenomenal workout what about
when you're sorry to cut your hair oh no
please but you know when you said shadow
boxing right when you're when you're
doing that
before you start the round are you
thinking this is what i want to
establish in my shadow boxing round i
want to establish a jab in the right
hand i wanted to establish like or are
you just doing it haphazardly sometimes
i'll watch a fight and i'll see a guy do
a nice sequence and that's what i'm
excited to work on tomorrow okay you
know i mean i'm just gonna maybe work my
job today okay now my uppercase there's
so much to work on there's so much to
there's so much to cultivate that that's
the fun part you get in your workout and
then after a while you wanna spar
sparring is the funnest why because
three rounds of sparring is
incredibly uh demanding on the body and
the time passes like this like i could
run forever i just get the reason why i
stopped running is i'm bored
running is easy for me like if you're
telling me jogging jogging doesn't do
anything to me like it'll make me sweat
yes but it won't fatigue me because it's
so much more
the intensity is so much lower than what
i'm used to doing
however i will get bored running unless
i'm listening to a good podcast or
something i'll get bored running
so it's boring it's i find it very
boring and it's not good for your your
body
especially for heavier people right yeah
exactly i like to run in a short burst
like i like to do 100 meter sprints okay
it's done i did it in 20 minutes it was
painful but short
that i enjoy
however boxing i have a bla have fun
when i box at night or it's fun you know
we're playing a game and the time passes
so fast that's the key to
fitness do something that the time
passes we should actually say that
you've got some tutorials don't you
what's the name of your website uh
ggclub.com yeah and how is that spelled
because people might not uh juliette
uniform juliet india
and then club
c-l-u-e-b dot com i've actually
as you know you know i've consumed much
of your content
if all you know the striking tutorials
you have some tutorials of your children
um yes head like a basic basic headlock
escape very important yeah and this is
kind of rearing us to the next part of
this discussion which is
the basics of self-defense
maybe we can not now after this because
you can show maybe some some
demonstrations we'll get some somebody
else we could do over here
but you know
how important is it
i couldn't imagine myself without my
martial arts skill i was so bullied as a
kid that boy yeah definitely i had two
older brothers i was small when i was
growing up i was smaller than everybody
so i got picked on a lot so martial arts
really carved a part of my my my psyche
could like i needed it so much and now
you've become you know what you are now
just so
i was watching a video of yours sparring
with i mentioned this with you some some
huge guy
the guy was the the strongest arm or
something like that at one point he's
world champion right hand and left hand
really yeah both hands at one point he
you know he gone you i don't know who
got on top of him you got on top of him
and his arm was there and you were
commenting on the videos like and if
there goes the world's strongest arm
and then you got him in the hill hook
position isn't it yeah like yeah yeah
which many people will not know what
we're talking about but you obviously
you have
graduated from the school of danah who's
like you know well known for
you know legs
and it's just so amazing to be honest
for me anyway
to be able to see that someone who if it
was a boxing affair and both were like
it wouldn't be the same but because
you're able to get the weakest part to
use dana has language right the weakest
part of the opponent's body and the
strongest part of your own
you're able to get someone who could be
almost double your size in terms of
weight i don't know how you had at least
100 pounds on you or something like that
into a position of
subordination
you know i mean if i tried to arm
wrestle him he'd rip my arm out of out
of the socket like he's so much stronger
than me like we play arm wrestle then i
could just see like his hand i feel like
a child you know i'm holding a no but
that's the point that someone's so
strong he's incredible his power is
incredible his physical look during that
time i i as we first started resting i
went on his back and i couldn't put my
legs around his back and he was grabbing
my arm and i knew like like i understood
right away what submission i have to get
to i have to isolate his ankle and get
to that ankle and you didn't think about
any other moves no i i think it's i
think it would be
every other submission is very risky
very risky for me
and the the leg lock is the one that's
super super almost impossible for him to
defend and super easy for me to access
so it's it's because the thing is the
bigger they are the easier they are to
leg lock you have you can have much more
trouble leg locking somebody your size
than somebody who's much bigger because
the foot is this big it's such an easy
lever for me to hook on to whereas the
guy has a size a normal size foot it's
very hard so someone's like myself what
should i do to avoid my
[Laughter]
you know what i'm going for forever
don't let the guy get there so you see
like uh like as we're engaging trying to
lift him would be ludicrous so because
he's so tall it's easy for me to slide
underneath so into a minority or
something like that yeah yeah but
actually i didn't use a minority i used
this ashy slide which is a slide
underneath straight into a leg lock so
there's no resistance there's no there's
no lifting there's no there's no i'm not
exposing my neck because you know when
you shoot a double leg you're exposing
your neck
like there's just so many dangers if he
puts his weight on he could hurt my back
so
it's you have to ask yourself what is
the
what is the easiest way for me to attack
him from safety a position of safety and
it's for in that situation not all
not all situations are the same if i was
fighting somebody my size i would use
different tactics oh is it yeah yeah
absolutely because he's so tall it's
very he's very vulnerable for an ashy
slide
so what should he do then just so i know
for reference
he's gotta not let me get
like he he'd have to he'd have to
he'd have to control my grip so that i
cannot actually slide which would be
complicated to explain okay okay you
have to fight my grip so that i cannot
grab him in a way that i can actually
slide but then there's other things i
can do if he if he does that you know
it's a we're playing chess you know yeah
and of course he's being a great sport
you know he's uh he's we're just playing
obviously i'm not going super hard he's
not going super cool but we're still
we're still getting nevertheless we're
still getting each other
just to give people a kind of a taste of
this because people look at the heel
hook that might and they don't know what
the ramifications of it are the
implications are if you finish it and if
there's nobody to stop it you're
destroying the man for life you're
breaking the case irreversible damage
right it's very dangerous on the knee
like it's you could you can have it
repaired but your knee might never be
the same either you know so yeah it's uh
it's a nasty some promotions actually
had banned the heel hook right
in all of ibjf heel hooks are illegal
yeah until very recently in nogi and in
the higher divisions only brown on black
or something yeah brown and black but
yeah but for many years it was frowned
upon because it's considered so
dangerous yeah
and you can injure something the thing
is when you injure your knee it's funny
because i actually just released a video
called strong and stable for life yeah
and strong and stable needs for life and
the reason why i did it is because
that's the number one question i get all
the time so i'm like you know what
i'm gonna do it because well i'm on the
mats i always have somebody tap me on
the shoulder and tell me hey coach i
have a knee injury what do i do i heard
you
you're you know you can fix my knee and
then i go through the whole spiel oh as
i said you know what let me put it on
tape got that on your channel yeah let
me let me get it on tape and now from
now on i'm just going to give it to my
members is it is it on the dude
it's uh knees are so important because
here's the problem with knees
if you injure your knee like a serious
injury like an acl tear yep on average
two years later the other acl goes
why they explain they explain to us that
your your body overcompensates one side
so what happens you never recalibrate
your joint your legs like they were
before so for instance if i injure
my shoulder i can go under the knife
but that doesn't affect my left shoulder
yeah if i injure my right doesn't affect
my left but when it comes to the knees
because your knees your legs are
carrying your body they have a certain
calibration between the two when you
injure one the other one takes over so
what happens you're overusing the one
that's compensating
so on average there's a tariff the
second one now when george tore his acl
we knew about this they warned us we
brought in every expert to make sure
that his acl the second one doesn't
break because it costs us a pretty penny
and he's in the height of his career now
we want to you know keep him as healthy
as possible
still it broke
and it broke the second acl broke and it
wasn't like a very intense wrestling he
wasn't wrestling like usual
but his knee failed and it was a scary
thing because now he broke a trust with
his knees like he doesn't trust his
knees like he used to wow
so we had to rebuild him physically and
psychologically to retrust his knees
again and he fought two world titles
after that successfully
but again there's a distrust with the
knees because don't forget you're
applying all your weight and the weight
of your opponent sometimes when you lift
your opponent it's your weight and his
weight on your knees
it's not the same thing with the
shoulder you don't rely on your
shoulders as much as you rely on your
knees your knees are so
important because of the base of your
power every time you generate power
whether you throw a punch
you're using your legs your posterior
chain it starts with the feet knees and
hips and it goes up the shoulder
does
does definitely uh
contribute to the kinetic chain however
it's not as fundamental
and it's not carrying as much stress
and it doesn't rely we don't rely on the
sensitivity of calibration my shoulders
don't need to be calibrated as
sensitively as my knees so all these
problems i tell like i i wrestle every
day twice a day i do mma doubles
the most brutal sport mma yeah and i've
never torn an ac alhamdulillah inshallah
i never do i've never torn acl why
i'm very
religious with my
prehab as we call it so what would you
do i i do a lot of
high level of stabilization work okay
i use the stability ball a lot like i
jump up on the stability ball i call it
the forbidden exercise really yeah
jumping up on the stability ball is very
dangerous you fall down break your neck
you got these catchphrases for
the touch of death
you can make a book on uh
catchphrases
yeah
i you know i learned that teaching
giving a good name a memorable name to
things is it's good for a point of
reference what you're talking about the
strongest arm in the world
it's almost like an exotic novel it's
important it's important i want my
students to know exactly what i'm
pinpointing yeah and uh
like i i'll jump up on a stability ball
but just to demonstrate the stability
i've built over the years
not that i would do that as an exercise
that's highly dangerous you know what
what forbidden
you'll break your neck i'm going to get
a thousand one in the lawsuits if i you
know that's why i named it that to make
sure that if i'm ever in court i'm like
hey i told it was forbidden
and
it's just to demonstrate
uh
stability but we don't build stability
in a dangerous with a dangerous exercise
we use safe exercises to build that
level of stability but then to
demonstrate stability okay we can do the
forbidden exercise as a demonstration
but stability training is huge number
one is alignment number two is making
sure you don't have tight muscles
because tight muscles pull you out of
alignment and number three is my opinion
is stability that's the one thing i
think that's missing from other programs
i'm a big believer in cultivating far
more stability than you need in your
sport
so the stability needed in mma is far
greater than any other sport i can play
basketball tennis soccer all day long
i'll never hurt myself right because
that's a far less amount of stability i
need
than in wrestling when the guy's
actively trying to throw you on the
ground and the guy's actively trying to
break my leg he's not it's not i broke
my leg kicking a ball no no the guy's
trying to grab my leg and twist my knee
off that's i need a tremendous amount of
know-how and stability and
uh
and athleticism to to keep my knee from
breaking so it's it's a far more
dangerous sport i just had one of my
fighters uh kevin lee he fought in the
khabib's fc
is he with you
and the first kick in the first fight
the first round
broke his acl one kick
he fought the rest of the fight on one
leg basically wobbling he won the fight
did amazing but let's show you how
dangerous the support we have
we're kicking each other in the knees
trying to break each other's legs
so don't tell me after you play tennis
and you hurt your knee that's a very low
level that's a that's
as an mma trainer
i can help you protect your knees as a
tennis player very easily really ah
absolutely because tennis is very it's a
controller you say the same thing about
gymnastics though gymnastics is more
dangerous yeah because gymnasts when
they jump
they've measured the landing force is
sometimes up to 21 times their body
weight yeah
gymnastics can be very dangerous
of course they're very intelligent
trainers i i have a high regard for
gymnastics i i actually use gymnastics a
lot in my program i'm the one who put
georgie appear in gymnastics i'm a big
believer in gymnastics training
they figured it out they figured out the
body how to make it you you decided
because you see the famous you know
videos of him yeah i put him onto
gymnastics really yeah absolutely yeah
definitely
they've understood the body more than
anybody else
when they dismount or they do certain
jumps they've measured one imagine 20
times your body nobody could squat 20
times their body weight doesn't exist
but they go up to
levels of up to 20 times because they're
they're spinning and crashing towards
the ground that's probably the most
dangerous sport
because they do it on mats etc and they
know how to control the the landings
they're brilliant athletes no doubt
um is it the most dangerous sport no i
wouldn't say it's the most dangerous
sport because it's more controlled than
let's say football football in my
opinion is probably the rugby and
football in my opinion is crazy is very
dangerous i gotta i i assume they're all
on on peds because the brutality of that
sport you know every every play
they crash into each other every play
the most recent cte studies that have
been done as usually done in the context
of american football right and this
i've i saw something or heard something
where by
i think i actually might have been joe
rogan he was saying
what he was saying that basically even
if you just do a year of american
football in
in school or college or whatever they
call it in america
because we call college something else
university is
their idea of college i think but um
college whatever if they spend one year
of doing that they can develop cte which
i think is only detectable through
autopsies i'm not sure i'm not sure
actually but they're saying that so
from that angle right i mean because
smashing and all those kind of things
into uh it's a brutal sport it's brutal
there's no weight class you can put your
kids into that yourself no i wouldn't
put my kids in football look you can get
hit by a guy who's 70 pounds heavier
than you it's part of the game you could
be running at you at full speed yeah and
he can hit you without you seeing him
you're you're here breaking a tackle
he's hitting you in this direction it's
a brutal sport i've seen tackles that
were brutal so you would say mma
comparatively is less dangerous
yeah in terms of injuries sustained and
stuff uh i would i would say
it's as dangerous because also don't
forget a knee to the head a kick to the
head a shin to the head is this is
brutal too yeah so i would tell you
football rugby mma i would say they're
on par okay because believe me a flying
knee to the head while you're shooting a
double could be disastrous as well
you could literally break the facial
structure the skull
you know it's unfortunate but i've seen
it but with your own kids then so would
you
what would you want them to be like
would you want them to be
would you would you push them in a
particular direction would you want them
to eat because you've said it before i
think that you'd want them to be black
belts in jiu jitsu yeah at the very
minimum would you want them to stay in
something like grappling to us to avoid
the impact on the head yeah yeah that's
definitely like i want no impact on the
head till they're adult they're finished
developing and then if they're really
passionate about it i want them to learn
kickboxing boxing and jiu jitsu no doubt
yeah because they live with me it's so
easy for them to get the black belt in
in that way they have such an advantage
why not take it like and i feel that jiu
jitsu will prepare them for life you
know teach them to work hard and think
just you have to work hard you have to
be smart you can't be a brutish and you
can't just be smart you have to have
both you're not an intellectual living
behind a book and you're not a guy who's
just lifting weights and getting strong
no no you're you're the two
jiu jitsu is like it's chess it's body
chest so you're developing the body the
mind it's a beautiful thing i really
enjoy that system so i want them to be
black belts and jiu jitsu master the
striking arts and then decide if you
want to fight
it could be a bonus but i would be happy
if my kids were doctors professionals uh
some you know pursue academia would make
me equally happy however i'd want them
to be able to defend themselves for me
it's very important
yeah because this is this is obviously a
tension between like like the mma stuff
and the islamic stuff in particular
because there is a very famous hadith of
the prophet where he says
if you it's very interesting actually if
if if you're fighting with your brother
then you know be careful of the face
because allah has created adam on his
own image
so
the idea being that in training
environments and i think this you are a
pro proponent of a low level don't break
your
your jaw in the gym or don't lose your
your jaw in the gym or your chin in the
gym
um
kind of thing where you're smashing your
head all the time
now science is telling us cte and all
that kind of thing as well
um it because the thing is if you have
an intellectual pursuit
which i think
like for example in the community we
would want our people to have
intellectual pursuits but you also have
a physical pursuit you wouldn't want
those two things to kind of work
against one against one another and so a
heavy like so for me i mean i i've told
you already like i've got my kids in bjj
and i'm like focusing on grappling with
them but i do realize i see the very
important
uh need for striking and i understand
also to get to develop that martial
literacy you need to do some sparring
but if you do inspiring with someone who
wants to take your head off every time
then there's an issue here as well isn't
that they can you know ev every gym has
this culture what's the culture of
tristar then culture is controlled
because we have classes called touch
sparring classes where there's no hard
hard shots just play spark and then
after you develop a certain ability to
move
then we invite you to the more robust
sparrings yes and those robust sparrings
are limited two times a week and for
training camp and they're done they're
done more sparingly
and even then there's a control even
then so so you would then you wouldn't
allow like elbows and knees no
only only the guys i trust the most were
gonna like simulate it they're not gonna
throw it for real okay the reason why
you wanna build the body yes yes you
don't wanna destroy the body when you go
in the gym you have to build the body
not destroy the body people go in the
gym to destroy the body it's wrong it's
the wrong way of thinking now there are
two methods to
build a very
strong gym one you put everybody all
these alpha males in one room you're in
a metropolitan city where there's
millions and millions of people
you're flooded with guys who want to
make it you put them in the room they
kill each other there's one guy who
survives at all and he's your champion
then you have a thousand one dead bodies
but you have one champion yeah
and the other method is
you teach each one of them how to be
their best you exhaust their potential
there's a you create a synergy where
everybody respects everyone nobody
injures the other we're here to develop
our skills not kill each other and then
you have a variety of of excellent
fighters yeah
and then from there they feed off each
other because excellence breeds
excellence and so on you have you got
this type of synergy
but many gyms are the darwinian style as
if i could say you know it's killer be
killed and you didn't make it too bad
there's another guy waiting to take your
place because we're in a very we're
we're in a city where it's too
jam-packed we have too many people
and you got hurt there's less space on
there's more space on the mat for us
because there are some places where
they're so full of people
that they don't care if they lose a
customer or not or a fighter they have
another guy coming in town he wants to
make it too so it all depends on what
kind of atmosphere and i breed an
atmosphere of building right not
uh last man standing type uh atmosphere
and is that i've heard i'm not sure of
talks industry but for example in
dagestan the way they do wrestling and
stuff like that they're soft they play
they're more playful yeah
and do you think that's that might be a
secret to their success because we're
seeing the rise of
i mean you've got um sagilev who's the
wrestler like he's he's i'm not sure
seen as pound-for-pound best freestyle
wrestler in the world right now and then
you've got like all these kind of
fighters of khabib being notable but
ankylo have done really well really well
now in the light heavyweight division
and other fighters as well
they seem to have a real
kind of pedigree
and
at the heart of it is grappling so is is
is that because they've developed team
spirit that they're all working with
each other or is it because of the
playful kind of training what is it
really what i think is i think i think
they have a
learn the sequences they have they have
a higher regard for technique
and so if you do something and you do it
using force it's considered your
wrestling is ugly it's not aesthetically
pleasing
why because if you mastered the
technique and then you unleash your
force you'd be even better
so they they breed a culture of wow you
got the technique right
where in america if you do something
athletic it's wow look how you bypass
the system yeah yeah whereas them know
do it right there's a wrong way in the
right way and then demonstrate your
athleticism so it's it's really the the
tradition of teaching and training
because not that americans are not
technical they are definitely they just
also have a great
enjoyment to watch something athletic
just something that's
freaky you know the guy can jump so much
or he can pull so much or what
they have more they breathe more culture
of do you do it right do you understand
why we do it this way and if the answer
is yes it's good if the answer is bad
explain it to him again you know because
they have this and that's why look the
european wrestling there's a lot to say
they have a lot more gold medals than in
the west okay
and also they support their athletes
more their other their other factors but
generally speaking most
wrestling experts will tell you that
they're more technical
the wrestling is more it's superior
does that have to do with state funding
i would say yes but also the culture of
learning like for instance if you look
at scandinavian countries they they do
really well in school even though they
do less hours and less homework and they
start at a later age why is that
well in america if you say something
like not not everywhere in america but
like
let's just put it this way they have a
high regard for
um
education education is seen as a good
thing it's seen it is true in america
but maybe more so in scandinavian
countries saying something like for
instance i remember watching dr phil
and there was this girl she was 16 years
old and she was like
getting angry at the crowd and she's
like take catch me outside how about
that
catch me outside let's go fight outside
she's saying and when she said that i
didn't understand what you're saying but
she became a star
now in scandinavia she would be it would
be frowned upon because she's doing
something a behavior that's probably
ignorant you know it seems like but in
america they'll they'll marvel at
they'll laugh about it because it's cool
it's funny and she later became a
millionaire she signed a 16 million
dollar contract or 40 if millions of
dollars to do like a music video where
she's just lip singing and it's like
crazy that they made her such a star why
because she went on dr phil and she
behaved in a certain way
now in certain other cultures that would
be rejected
that would be frowned upon that would be
embarrassing they probably wouldn't even
show it on the air
however in certain cultures hey it's
considered cool and fun and and funny
and then marvelous and whatnot so
culture makes a huge difference
absolutely right like you know
especially in india china like
why why do they
excel so much over and above western
countries and for example sub jobs like
mathematics
uh probably the same kind of reasoning
the the education and the teacher gets
to maintain his integrity whereas in the
west the teacher is almost like a
dispensable asset like you know you can
just replace him if you don't like him
you can vote him out or something you
know i remember watching a documentary
where they they sent they brought in a
chinese
a group of chinese teachers here to
england
and they separated a grade one would do
the chinese system one would do
the english system
and the chinese teachers were like
in china we don't have to discipline
because they were asking the students to
do a b and c and the students weren't
doing it
and that the chinese teachers were
perplexed they were like in china we
don't have to discipline they're born
disciplined
meaning in their culture they're raised
by the time they go to school they
already understand that you have to
follow the rules and it's natural to
them
so in the west they had this different
challenge where they had to they had to
try to discipline the children but they
had no means to they had no program for
this and they were making the kids work
harder longer and eventually they
compared the grades and the chinese
school had better grades the chinese
group but then the chinese teacher said
something very interesting he said look
in china we have kung fu
and we have pandas but we would never
have kung fu panda meaning
that by being so rigid they kind of kill
creativity and that's something the west
has that so this it was complimentary
yeah yeah hard work will make you book
smart yes but what is it taking from you
you know mark twain said the best one
time he said don't let don't let school
get in the way of your education wow
so look being i should have said that to
the teacher when i was being
sent to the detention center all the
time
i think i think you can go too far in
being rigid and academic
because it can cost i think both sides
have something to learn from one another
yeah yeah sure it's complementary that
we have to strike a middle ground
somewhere but comparing the two makes
for interesting uh uh con like um
you know
it'll teach us to think differently and
experiment with different methods but i
think culture is something that's
overlooked it makes a massive difference
like me my kids i try to instill instill
into them that on knowledge knowledge
knowledge is good for you always truth
is always good for you one way or
another truth is good for your truth is
something to be desired and one way or
another it
it brings you a benefit one way or
another you have to have that kind of uh
belief in truth you know one way or
another the truth is always good for me
even though i think it's bad now down
the line is gonna it's gonna provide
something
truth is that truth is a very special
phenomenon
do you know um one of what i have these
conversations with you especially when
you have private conversations one thing
that always comes up is family and uh
even those who kind of follow you on
social media would have seen the video
that you very famous viral video that
you've done was like a day in the life
of for us the hobby very beautiful video
fantastic and one thing that really
sticks out or
is your relationship with your children
like you do
uh as many people that would watch your
content would know you do like jiu-jitsu
with them you do martial arts with them
but you do a lot of
conversation with them and this is
something that i think which is being
lost in transition in our communities
like where fathers are actually taking
you know a responsible role with their
children
what do you have to say about
the extent to which we should as men for
example be responsible over our children
and what kind of fruit does this have in
one's life
look i would say after after god what's
the next important thing in your life
it should be family it's the greatest
good yeah nobody ever had a successful
family and said hey i would have traded
my family for a lamborghini or a mansion
or a music career or or a a
career in politics
all that is secondary
you if you failed your family if you're
if you're
a millionaire movie star and your
family's broken i don't consider you
successful
i don't consider you successful
i think you failed so be careful with
your family your family is
paramount super important
i i really tell you know i always tell
my friends you should have something in
common with your kids maybe not
everything but something that we share
together in my kids sports sports but
more things we play video games together
what is it yeah oh yeah we we like to
kind of like
uh we used to play a lot of uh what a
fortnight oh is it yeah yeah i'm
some of these guys they go crazy on
fortnite yeah so on different level
addictions and all this kind of yeah
absolutely yeah um but you control it
right you control your time we prank
each other we like making fun of each
other
my sons call me boy
cause i'm superior to him so i call him
boy
no he's just a boy he's his son my son
that's my son like he's lower than me
yeah he'll call me son also like we you
know we play we we're friends we're
buddies especially when we drive to the
gym yeah we're in the car together mom
is not there sister's not there i tell
him we can talk about anything
you have complete immunity when we get
in the car we're driving ask me anything
really yeah
conversations i would never repeat to my
wife no way
she thinks they're still little young
boys
he's still 100 young maybe he's still
100 boy i said no he's a man now he's
still 100 boys she's in denial can you
give us a little flavor away no okay
when you make this pg-19
no they're boys they're curious they
want to know female that you have set
time okay all right i want to know
everything about the opposite sex right
so i have to tell them where else are
they going to learn it they're going to
learn it
somewhere else somewhere else right yeah
so i let them know i talked to them and
um i was gonna say like wait do you have
set times
um like in the sense that okay obviously
with martial arts you're gonna probably
go to school or whatever right and they
come out and you probably go
you know um training with them kids
classes i'm guessing
or maybe home classes but you have set
timing for okay i'm gonna sit down and
talk to you guys about
the stories or do you have anything like
that uh generally we talk on the way to
the gym because it's a one hour commute
half an hour there half an hour back we
talk about everything religion women
history science politics money bitcoin
everything they want and everything
everything my sons are bitcoiners too
they want to know everything i try to
teach them everything why because if you
don't talk with your kids i want to know
their thought process how do they by the
way
13 my son all the son is 13. the second
is amen right no noah i know it's the
older the aim is the second one right
amon the troublemaker he's uh
he's 10. no sorry he's 11 now he's 11.
yeah 13 11 and my baby girl alisa yeah
seven years old
she's the gem of the family
she's my favorite i saw as i call her
the favorite
i saw you in the video i saw i saw the
glow in your eye when you saw it
with the baby door is something you
could do right yeah yeah
but there's a there's a fear in that
because my my youngest daughter as well
to be honest with you
i'm actually in a similar camp i worry
that you know she's going to be spoiled
let's put it mildly you know because you
know she's she can always like get her
way through
kind of cry of course smile make her
face or something she knows how to play
the system
absolutely do you see that in the case
i mean there is a time where i do this
with her because i feel that if i spoil
her i'm doing her the series to be
honest there is a time i draw a hard
line but i do spoil her every time i
travel i bring her back gifts i shower
with love i take care of my daughter my
daughter is number one yeah
but there's a time i have to draw the
line i have to discipline her i think
it's it's just because it's for her own
good yeah
and
or else she'll become spoiled right
spoiled and that's it's very important
that she's not you know because then one
day
she'll have difficulty functioning in
society yeah it's not always about her
you know she's got to know that yeah we
have this playful time where i make it
all about you but then we get serious
and look everybody waits their turn
everybody gets their fair share and you
have to you know get out get with the
program uh
the idea is that in the future she's
gonna marry a guy who takes care of her
like her father takes care of her she
has a map in her mind she knows how it
feels to be treated well and that's how
it should feel if she's going to marry
somebody
um i take my i make my sons take care of
her because one day when i die they're
going to take care of her it's a reflex
she needs something i said her brother
kind of things would you say to your
sons
absolutely if if i hear my baby girl
crying and my sons don't get up
to check on her it's gonna be a problem
on that level oh yeah if she's in if
she's in pain or she needs help or she
there's no toilet paper they got to get
up and go get it for her like
they better get up right now and do it
why because i want to cultivate in them
a sense that she's the most important
person in in our lives and you have to
take care of her why she's the youngest
okay she's younger she's the baby girl
look my sons they take her to the bus
stop and they bring her back home but if
she wasn't the youngest there would be
more you would say there's being more
give and take yeah because i always tell
my sons when they get fed up taken care
of i say who used to take care of you
yeah you used to torture me the same way
you used to cry and nag for this and i
took care of you yeah i want them to
know how to take care of someone else
don't be selfish don't be it's all about
me so i think it's really important you
know to unite them to make them feel
good about one another and i always tell
my daughter be grateful look he took
care of you he waited for you he took
you here he took you there he watched
you she wants to go to the park while
she has to go with her brother okay he's
going to take you he doesn't want to go
to the park but he's going to go spend
an hour with you my daughter likes to
wrestle believe it or not she's like
papa i wanna fight
hey man do five minute round with her
how does she again seven oh she loves to
fight yeah do a five minute round with
her two five minute rounds okay two five
no question yeah of course they let her
be you know but she she loves to wrestle
she loves to she's a tomboy okay she's a
tomboy she likes to throw down you go
you guys go like matt's everywhere in
the house the whole house is mad the
majesty is a dojo
so they they wrestle they have fun and i
tell her she wants to do three rounds
say no call us enough you did two he
gave you his time now do something at
rounds or three three no five minute
rounds we'll do five minute rounds do
you ever do do you ever do full fully
fledged sparring uh no no no the kids no
no no no no no no just just grappling uh
graphic we do body shot sparring i'm a
big believer in the kyokushin style
system like if you look at george grew
up in that system where they kick and
punch to the body really and then later
as they're older they teach some
striking to their head do you not think
that one of the drawbacks of that system
is that if you learn to punch the body
and defend to the body that when you go
and do sparring
fully fledged that your defenses will be
they quickly catch up are you sure yeah
absolutely because
there's many world champions in k1 that
came from a karate background that had
hard time early in the beginning then
they adopted boxing and george is one of
them george exactly like this he had a
great kicking and punching to the body
but no punching to the head it was very
easy to hit he quickly transformed why
because it's very similar
and it's it's just basically you're
putting the icing on the cake it's not
really you're you're not building the
whole idea of reflexes and distance
control and the thing is because they
haven't gotten hit in the head their
mind is completely well developed and
clear
you know so i really believe in the
system i think it's fantastic because
you learn how to kick punch distance
control and actually it's more painful
to get hit in the body than the head the
head you don't really feel anything and
just you might see a spark here and
there a star here and there but you
don't feel pain like getting in the body
so they're actually more resistant to
pain
and they're less likely to head hunt
because they've been hitting the body
their entire life
it's a brilliant system i think it's
very very good and i think
well
in kyokushin karate
the karate system because they're they
start in the youth they only attack the
body even in taekwondo they just they
put a shield on the body and you can hit
the body as hard as you want right okay
well not not every kyokushin tournament
is as hard as you want they have
somewhere you're not allowed to hit as
hard as you want but it's very very safe
for the brain like the worst you can get
is
really hard on the body and winded
mm-hmm so basically you run out of you
get dropped to your knees and you can't
breathe for a second or two and it's
very rare but it's nothing serious and
george came from that background
absolutely he became world champion
that's why i'm telling people it's
better to do it that way
then because if you look at boxers and
muay thai fighters after they're retired
the ones who started very very young a
lot of them unfortunately become
alcoholics
dysfunctional they're completely
dysfunctional they can't go into society
why
the way that they explain it the way
i've heard it to be explained is that
when you get hit in the head often
the brain the receptor in your brain is
not as
efficient it's not as sensitive so what
happens
if a hundred is feeling normal they're
at 80.
so they need a substance a self-medicate
they say they take drugs or alcohol to
bring them up to just a hundred just to
feel normal
and i don't know if this narrative is
true you know i've heard experts say
this but i i can't say that i have no
studies
explains this for a fact but
i've definitely noticed a trend that
ex-boxers are not functional after yeah
i've seen yeah i've i've been in
thailand believe me i've been i've been
in the thick of it okay
land they they retire like 32 or
something right younger 526 yeah because
it's just too much is it because they
used to be on the stage and now they
have they have a regular job and that's
what's depressing them i don't know i
can't tell you that either narrative is
true i don't know for a fact i thought
it was because their bodies had had
enough i think it has a lot to do with
blows to the head is that yeah yeah um
i think excessive looks to the head
don't forget they do with elbows kicks
to the head it's brutal yeah that's why
i'm very sensitive to that issue your
brain is developing because the thing is
in thailand they make them fight with
elbows and knees as kids like we're
talking about seven-year-old
eight-year-old six years old
and they make them cut weight who knows
what that does to your organs and brain
i don't know what it does there's no
study that tells you there's no study
following kids cutting weight so i think
it's too much i rather my kids have a
development yeah their bodies fully
developed and then i'll add them to
these do you know an mma there are two
kind of if you want to call them that
schools of thought someone's come from a
specialist background and then they
learn the other two or three sports
whatever they're gonna learn all
together and someone who's trying to be
a generalist
in terms of effectiveness
and general efficacy who what do you
think other like where has success been
more seen
people that have for example freestyle
wrestling backgrounds and then they come
and they learn like a bit of striking
and
jiu-jitsu or someone who's trying to do
all three at the same time um i would
recommend doing wrestling and jiu jitsu
first
wrestling in jitsu shouldn't be
separated
and do that because you're gonna build
an athleticism the wrestlers have a
better athleticism
then let's go into striking
and i'll quick quick what age is always
talking about here
i would say look after your brain
finishes developing i would teach my
kids how to hit the bag earlier on like
my kids they don't do a lot of striking
they do a lot of wrestling in jiu jitsu
and then i make them hit the back let's
say once a week once every two weeks
just so they can develop that
coordination when they're young
because we've seen world champions pick
up kickboxing at the age of 14 and
become world champion by the time
they're 25.
what happened he learned in such a short
period well it doesn't take that long
it's not that it takes forever to learn
however
jiu jitsu is complicated yeah
and wrestling is there's a lot of
uh possibilities whereas in kickboxing
and muay thai
it's more about speeding timing the
possibilities are not that complicated
comparatively comparatively don't forget
and jiu jitsu jesus there's so many
nuances there's so many positions so
many things you have to learn cerebrally
now boxing is also you know there's a
lot of detail but nowhere near nobody
can the possibilities in wrestling in
jujitsu are far greater than striking
i i i saw a video of john jones one time
he was asking what's the most potent
sport um kind of martial in the sport
and he said it was freestyle wrestling
to what extent do you agree that if you
have a time limit i would say yeah it
makes sense if there's no time limit
it's jiu jitsu right because look jiu
jitsu was developed in the time of vale
tudor valley tutorial means anything
goes me and you would fight but there's
no time limit the winner gets the
videotape that's how it was
fights will last two three hours so what
you took me down so what however if you
take me down and there's only two
minutes left on the clock
and you just fend off my submissions and
you just kind of hold me tight and you
just and the bell rings they give you
the round you read
you repeat the process two more times
and you win
however that's just 15 minutes
that's not a long time for two guys to
find out who's a better fighter now
let's say that let's say we made it
unlimited rounds and the fighter the
wrestler gets subbed in seventh round
you'll be like oh the grappler is better
yeah but you didn't get to the seventh
round in competition night you only saw
the first three
because believe me when i tell you
um
the wrestlers don't have a way to end
the fight often
so i've seen many fights where there was
no time limit and the wrestler gets
subbed or knocked out or hurt because he
just had no way to end the fight he can
get the guy down he can't do anything
about it it takes years to refine how to
pass their guard mount them take their
back etc
so
with because we've made it more of a
sport it's more time sensitive i would
say yes makes sense
and on this point what do you think with
the whole comes out hamza chameleo and
burns
if it becomes a grappling affair then on
this analysis it should favor burns
because then he could yeah but because
of the time limit i don't think there's
much you can do like you have to look
the better the guy is the more sequences
i need to trap him
and the guy knows that so what he's
going to stall he's going to have stall
tactics he's not even going to do the
sequences he knows that if he keeps
breaking grips keep interrupting the
sequences he can eventually kill the
time so what do you think's going to
happen i think comes that's going to win
it's going to be a stand-up affair is it
yeah i think he has the reach the power
the the the distance he's assault pots
and open stance it could be harder for
uh bernstein he's a blue belt compared
to yeah but
that's that's misleading because he's
been wrestling his whole life and people
think wrestlers don't do ground that's
not true
see the fatal flaw in jiu jitsu is that
they do just ground a lot of them like
in my academy we do standing and we do
ground
wrestlers do standing and ground it's a
myth that they don't it's it's not true
that they do a different type of ground
but it's very relevant to what we do on
mma but
with the difference being with um anklev
and um
khabib is that they did right
whereas
whereas whereas hamza is coming from a
freestyle restaurant but freestyle they
do ground
yeah but they do like what you call it
gut wrench etc that's plenty they do a
lot of ground there is a lot of ground
so they know how to control their
balance they know how to hold you down
from getting up i don't think it's going
to be too much of a ground affair would
surprise me i mean nothing's impossible
but i think it's a it's a good very good
hamsa it's a very good fight for him
it's gonna be interesting i think if he
gets through this one
you know a very yeah i thought martial
is a world champion or in ibj
burns ah burns he is right so if he gets
through him i think that would
definitely mean that he's
i think one of the top guys there i
think the winner is going to get kobe
covington
hamzat or
burns
both of them i think either whoever wins
the fight gets kobe and the winner of
kobe versus
kamza go back tomorrow or yeah i think
we'll go to camaro but even then if it's
the thing is if kobe wins would they do
a third time
it's boring isn't it it's it's
i think it wouldn't sell yeah i mean
yeah i mean i would watch it but i don't
know if it's cell because he lost twice
convincingly yeah i think it would have
to be a camzat beating a kobe and now we
have a new contender they're saying kobe
is going to go up to middleweight now i
think
that's what no he said he's cooled up
yeah
oh uh
maybe he's called him up
you don't think he's because he's got a
grappling pedigree right or do you i
know he's very good look kobe is a real
he's a legit fighter yeah i don't know
if he beats uh
uh
i don't think so because
his fate or weakness was his gravity
yeah sure sure but he's much bigger
longer stronger dangerous at the same
thing
was bigger and stronger that's the
difference yeah blood blochovic was 205
yeah
i think pound for pound at the seniors
better than blojovic yeah but there's a
massive there's a 20 pound weight
difference wait a way in difference not
even a weight difference
blhovich was even bigger than that
that's a massive order so adesanio beats
kovy covington you see bobby covington
what do you think is going to happen
between him and uh hamzat if they go i
think hamzad has his number really yeah
with the grappling and stuff striking
cannot strike him really
i think so possible here's the thing
here here's my i want to say one thing
we haven't seen hamzat in later rounds
sometimes the guy looks so good in round
one and round two he falls apart round
three he falls apart so i don't know
that about him yet i don't know if he
fights hard all the way to the third but
if he can maintain what he does in
rounds one
because all i've seen is round one from
we'll beat everybody him
seen a lot from madison i mean he's good
we know we know what he looks like
around five and he's very durable yeah
he's very durable yeah and uh
mike there's a question mark and comes
that does he have that durability i
think so but we haven't seen it yet
that's why i don't want to jump the gun
and say yes he has it i don't know i
haven't seen that yet but
uh i i really like him against kobe so
do you think he's that he he faces
better chances against um
sanya than he does against
than he does against um
that's tough to call i think uzman's
ultimate challenge for hamzad right yeah
because usman is very mentally tough
also not that arasanya isn't but
it's going to be easier to take down i
think than uh kumaro
that's that's the problem isn't that
because kumar was he's only ever been
taken down once in his career not that
they counted it when kobe took him down
the last fight they didn't statistically
count it but in my opinion it was it was
a takedown who would you have between
usman and george simpion
am i getting in trouble now
listen i love both those guys yeah but
if i have to be totally candid i think
george just has more skills
yeah george has more skills even now
he's more developed yeah even though
like his game goes deeper he has more
layers
and i love usman i really love us man i
i love the guy he's
if you met i don't know if you met him
he's a very sweet humble person kind
salted the earth guy um
this goes beyond you know but i guess
so so yeah but exactly so sure i i hate
to pick one over the other because i
like them both so much but george's game
just goes deeper
yeah he's just he has a greater
understanding of
what about khabib versus uh
pound for a pound
well if they had to catch weight let's
see
people are gonna people are gonna grill
me for this but i'll pick khabib i think
i think that highly of khabib i think
khabib is the ultimate killing machine
he's incredible
so i just feel that khabib has a few
more layers and he's he's just
he's as tough mentally as as usman
and not that i ever want to see them
fight they're close you know they would
never fight each other but i think i
think khabib is like he's a special cut
above
he's very special khabib
i wanted to speak to you more about your
philosophies
but i think what we'll do is we'll do um
when you're when you're back in canada
we'll do an episode just for them
uh because
last time when when i did this
and we said oh we got for us we we made
it the opposite way we kind of spoke
more about the feel philosophical issues
more
and the um
and the the the sports stuff less but
this i think
you know the first time we had a fleshed
out conversation about these things i
think this is very important for the
muslim community but obviously people
don't realize that you have been
really deeply involved i mean one time
maybe you wouldn't mind me saying this
but
in addition to your training you do
hours and hours of studying don't you
like
maybe three four five hours a day or
some how many hours yeah i would say two
to five sometimes wow wow when i travel
you read that much yeah i do what do you
read what do you do
i do a lot of you know what i really
like uh is audible audible.com i use a
lot of their
audiobooks i do a lot of lectures i find
lectures online science history
philosophy
religion i like to listen to debates
lectures i mean absolutely everything on
science history philosophy religion i
listen to all of it i buy all the books
i buy hundreds of books
and for me it's a pleasure just
listening to it as a pleasure like
people listen to music i listen to
audiobooks wow yeah and and as it helped
you gain a sense of spirituality now
we're two weeks away from ramadan
like the the spiritual aspects of islam
you've been reading a lot of ghazali
recently as well haven't you and
what have you what have you kind of
taken from that and
for people that might be listening to
this who might not be aware of the
islamic tradition in particular
what would you guide them to in terms of
reading material
i think gazelle is hard to read honestly
okay i think i think i would if i didn't
study philosophy for so many years
before gazali i wouldn't have understood
anything he meant so i think hazel is
actually quite a difficult read
it's not a good place to start per se if
you don't have a background yeah if you
if you don't have a background then you
start with the quran you know exactly
with the profit
it's a long ways away
um
i don't think i don't think philosophy
is a place where you start yeah i
definitely don't think you start there
uh but you can you can build to that and
um
you know it's it's it's
again you know you start with the quran
the sunnah and then
i'll listen i studied the greeks i
studied muslim philosophers and the
british empiricism and enlightenment
period i think the three together
because i think a lot of them each one
of them was commentary of the on the
past they were influenced by the past
and
logic is an innate thing
so hazel said it beautifully said it
doesn't matter who said it we have to
study each
each claim by itself standing alone and
see whether it's true or not doesn't
matter if aristotle said something or
this guy said something it doesn't
matter we have to verify it for
ourselves we have to have demonstration
and this is this is i think very
important but ultimately speaking
everything boils back down to the fitrah
like you can't go further than that once
you try to go further than that this is
the limit
and
this is what gives certainty hazali's
work is all about getting to certainty
and certainty is a very special thing we
have to differentiate between knowledge
and belief
and certainty is a type of knowledge
that's that's unique
and once you find that nucleus
everything else makes sense everything
makes sense
but you have to get to that nucleus and
that's what he does that's that was his
his uh
crisis as he describes it you know he
went through a crisis because he wanted
to know what's the bedrock of it all
and it's quite a profound thing and
for you reading the quran
and reflecting over and and things like
that what are some of the main things
you have taken away from from that
reading
i think i think the quran
it
touches on every type of logic
and it ultimately tells you look
you were born with this special thing
called the fitra this innate belief this
tao had within you
and you have to revert back to that
natural religion
and the quran is reminding you and
telling you about it and
like we were talking about earlier there
are levels of truth there are levels
there
when we talk about what is true that's a
very complicated thing you could put 10
experts in epistemology in one room and
they won't agree on the definition of
truth
so how are you making claims to truth
when we don't even have the definition
of it i think islam ultimately is asking
you to discover
the ultimate truth now
god himself in my opinion the way i
understand it
is actually the only thing that is a
hundred percent objectively true
do you know this is actually a beautiful
um hadith on this there was there's a
poem uh a pre-islamic poet called labit
and
um
he was one of the people actually
because before islam there were there
were poems that were hung up on the um
the kaaba
called them
one of the one of the main people that
wrote was a person called
but he was also a time he was at the
time of the prophet as well and he had a
very um interesting line of poetry which
was
whatever is other than allah is in vain
was not true or is not fully true
and the prophet actually commented on
this line of poetry and he said that
this
is the truest thing a poet has ever said
alhamdulillah which is kind of in line
with what you're saying isn't it
it's
it's something we all know
but
i think ever that's why i say i don't
believe in atheism bring me an atheist
i'm going to find you a deity he
believes it bring me an atheist
they all believe in something
he believes in he believes in a deity
somewhere somehow i'm going to find the
deity in his beliefs i'm going to
cross-examine aluminum and how are you
defining a deity here
something you project from your mind
onto the world
and my definition will go further in
this but just to keep it simple let's
give for
instance nature nature is the most
famous deity in today's age nature what
brought us about nature
nature is just that a word is just sound
you made with your mouth what does it
mean nature
see
nature comes from your observation of
particulars if i asked you what is
nature you would say
well you would have to point to examples
you would say look at that flower
that's nature okay if i destroy all the
flowers nature's gone no no no there's
also
the river
the water cycle the trees
the
the bees the ants the cattle
okay what if i destroy all that oh no
there's still more what if i destroy
every particular thing
what if we had a universe an empty
universe would you know nature now you
wouldn't know nature now there's nothing
there's no collective
so
how do you know nature well you saw
blades of grass
you felt the wind
and the word nature is just a collective
to name all those particulars you
experienced
i mean this is exactly what um i think
he believed in that and certainly
nominalism yeah nominalism and and um
was you could say conceptualist as well
like in the sense that he didn't believe
in el culiereto like the gene genuses or
the universals existed
in reality and said you only know them
through the particulars we're projecting
them from our minds this is a name i
give like for instance how many trees
does it take to make a forest well
that's subjective you might have a
different number than me it's a
projection of our mind what do you think
it is it's there's there's subjectivity
is always mingled in what you what you
call truth
except in one instance
so there's part concept part observation
in a quran it says do they not
consider the seed that they sow like
your
nature is coming after your observation
so i observed
particulars
then i came up with the idea of nature
without the particulars that universal
doesn't exist
the universal is dependent on
particulars
allah is telling you look i don't depend
on particulars
i am the particular this is the quranic
point of view
so one example i've
come up with recently is to help make
this even clearer is remember the ship
of thesis yeah okay so let's think about
the ship of thesis okay i'm gonna i'm
gonna go through it again real quick
because i know we've done it before yeah
the ship of thesis is a ship of 99 parts
it belongs to a man named thesis every
day he changes changes apart
after 99 days his ship has been
completely re
every pace has been changed 99 days 99
parts
those old parts we put them in a
warehouse somewhere he's sailing that
ship we all identified as the ship of
thesis
then one day i go in the warehouse i put
this the old pieces back together now
there are two ships on the ocean we both
call them both the ship of theseus and
if i ask you which one is the ship of
pieces
well now it has a lot to do with your
subjective uh sense of what identity is
there's no objective way to
differentiate which one is the ship of
thesis
now imagine these two ships are i'm
gonna make the problem even worse
imagine these two ships are going around
on the ocean
and every day each ship is still
changing a new piece
and the old pieces i'm taking from both
ships and i'm creating a third ship
and the ships are changing piece every
day and
they're they're their particulars are
being mingled shuffled like a card of
deck of cards and i'm making thousands
and thousands of ships now ask you which
one is the ship of thesis you're like
hey well you know it all depends on how
you see it
the ship of thesis is an archetype
there's an archetype in your mind and
you use that archetype this is what
plato called the forms to identify
what's out there
but now i want you to
put this example to the side think about
a ship now if i told you about a ship
it's the divine ship
this ship is not trans it doesn't
transition it doesn't change it always
was will always be and there will never
be another ship
you no longer need this archetype
there's no more form of ship
you had an archetype because that thing
the original example i gave
the ship of thesis that goes through a
change like me and you our bodies after
seven years of life your entire all your
cells have been changed in your body
we are like the ship of theseus we are
part archetype we are part observation
we are part object
but imagine a ship that was divine
never changes and never will change and
always was
if i told you if i asked you something
about that ship if i told you where's
the ship of these you say that's the
ship of theseus now there's no more
archetype there's no more subjectivity
there's no more your opinion is
different than mine and we're equally
true we're not equal footing no more now
there are facts now it's truly objective
in the original
example i gave you it was subjective the
truth was subjective there was part
object
part archetype so there was room for
subjectivity now there is no more room
for when there is only one
see like if you give me a
a pagan god there's an archetype to
their gods
this is what i refer to oftentimes as
the abrahamic experience you have to
strike down
all
the multiplicities because to get to
objectivity pure objectivity which is
what ghazali was looking for when allah
tells you i am one he's telling you look
i am literal i am the particular
you all are particulars and universals
you are not like me
is one category there will never be any
category like this
this is what the quran is telling allah
like
you have to understand when
when i teach you language when you learn
language every word is dependent on
another word
if i want to explain you what table
means i have to explain to you the words
i have to use words and those words that
i use to explain the word table also are
contingent on other words
how can i explain to you table if
there's an infinite regress of
contingent words well i have to give you
experience i have to tell you look this
is a table
now you have direct experience with the
table
the word table goes with it if you
didn't see a table i could never use
words to explain to you what table is i
have to i have to
tie it with some experience you have
this is very important because when i
tell you about allah you don't tell me
what does that mean i never heard of
this no you know exactly but i never
pointed i never pointed here this is
allah
you know allah so i say there's no
atheist
because i've never spoke to a person who
said look i don't even understand what
you're talking about
because if i'm
you cannot truly make up something all
you could do is take things that exist
and make a collage
so if people tell me look i believe in
the god of war i might say no you took
god and you took war and you mingled
them together
but
like a blind man can never know the
color red
unless you fix his eyes and he sees red
like that when i talk to you about allah
you know exactly what i'm talking about
wow
so i i came up with another thought
experiment to try to teach this to to
make it more simple mm-hmm what gazelle
is trying to say
we've all you've heard about the beetle
in the box so for instance this is to
point to the heart problem of
consciousness imagine i have a insider i
have a box and inside this box i open
the box inside there's a beetle
you you have your own box you open your
box you see a beetle
but there's no beetles in existence we
don't see them when we observe the world
around us we all see books we see
microphones we see cars but we don't see
any beetles but when i look at my box i
tell you i try to explain to you what
i'm seeing and you try to explain to me
what you're seeing or like hey we both
have one
we both have a beetle in the box
every person we meet they all have a
beetle in the box but we can't look in
each other's box this is what's known in
philosophy as the ego centric
predicament you're trapped within your
own body
if i tell you hey guys my beetle has a
blonde hair
you're like wait a second no blonde hair
is that's dunya
you're taking the beetle and you're
mixing it with what you saw in the world
the beetle in the box is not we're not
seeing it in the dunya we're seeing it
internally we're having direct
experience with the beetle in the box
any if i tell you hey my my beetle is
wearing boxing gloves you can be like no
no that part's not true
that part's not true because that's not
what i'm seeing when i'm looking you're
taking dunya and you're mixing it in
with the beetle in the box so every
every human being is born with this
fitra this belief in one god
you're incubated in it
then when you're born you find things
that
you want to associate with it you want
to mingle with it
and then therefore you have polygamy
that's another you know another
sorry did i say polygamy yeah freudian
slip you said
yeah well i meant um
uh
assimilation no no no multiple gods and
integration no no no monopolism
we're both thinking polygamy
[Laughter]
sorry my fault yeah that's fine edit
that part for my wife please
it's okay don't worry yeah um yep uh not
polygamy
polytheism
so that's where where polytheism comes
from yeah i always tell people you learn
the number one first
then you learn two you can't learn the
number two
two is one and one
you cannot explain the number ten
without referring to the number one
every other
supposed deity
is a mingling of the number one
so like all words
rely on experience experiences
when we say the word god it also relies
on experience
there's not a word you know that doesn't
rely on experience that's very deep it's
very important it's amazing that's why
there is no there is no atheist on the
face of the earth
there is not an atheist when they tell
me nature did it i'm like man he still
hasn't understood the difference between
universal and particulars wow well with
that i mean i have to say it's been a
pleasure it's been an absolute pleasure
i think many people would have benefited
more from this podcast than many
podcasts
um honestly any time this office is your
office you know you can come down and um
one day and shout out come down to
quebec
and i want to thank you about the muslim
community and all the other communities
for coming onto my podcast
and that's another episode of the mh
podcast the most irregular podcasts
on the internet
thank you for watching
muslims in norway are now establishing a
masjid and dawa center to enhance the
norwegian dawah if you donate to the
scores you will ensure allah reap the
rewards of thousands of muslims coming
back to islam and many of those will
become dwight and invite to islam so
click the link and donate now and share
the video for extra reward